---
layout: post
title: "Video: Three Weeks in Czechia, Croatia, Venice, and Hallstatt"
description: ""
tags: [Travel, Video, Linux, Adventure]
---

I was lucky to be able to spend three weeks this August in Czechia and Croatia
with my girlfriend, with sidetrips to Skocjan Caves in Slovenia,
Venice in Italy and Hallstatt in Austria.

Without further ado, here's a fun video montage from the trip:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/8Hoc584RQUM?rel=0" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Here are some of the places we visited, as shown in the video:

<!--more-->

- Czechia:
  - Prague
  - Bezdez Castle
  - Trosky Castle
  - Cesky Krumlov
- Croatia:
   - Plitvice Lakes
   - Dubrovnik
   - Korcula, where the footage from that wild outdoor water polo match is from
   - Trogir
   - Split
- Skocjan Caves, Slovenia
- Venice, Italy
- Hallstatt, Austria

On a side note, this was the first video I've edited together in Kdenlive
on my Ubuntu travel laptop. The laptop is designed to be light, small, and
highly portable... which are traits that generally are not found in
the workhorses meant for video editing. This did become a factor,
as there were some shots in the video that I applied some effects to
(e.g. blending two clips or a big speed modification), and I was basically
not able to properly preview during the editing process
how they would look in the final video. Whether to blame this on my
poor laptop's overworked integrated graphics card or on Kdenlive I am not sure.
My guess would be the graphics card.

Overall, I found Kdenlive quick to learn, easy to use, and having all of the
requisite features most people might need most of the time. If you're
in the market for free (and open source!) video editing software,
I can recommend it.

Having said that, I must admit that is not quite as polished as, say,
Adobe Premiere or DaVinci Resolve, both of which I use on my workhorse
computer. I found color correction, for example, to be far easier
in Premiere than in Kdenlive.
